Abstract:

Lake-effect precipitation, which significantly impacts regions downwind of the Great
Lakes, poses unique forecasting challenges due to its dependence on localized
processes and intricate interactions, making it an ideal candidate for deep learning.
This study introduces a novel approach toward next-hour quantitative precipitation
forecasts (QPF) for lake-effect precipitation by leveraging an improved generative
adversarial network (GAN). Key innovations include testing multiple input variable
groupings, modernizing the generator and discriminator, and expanding predictions to
four Great Lakes: Superior, Michigan, Erie, and Ontario. A UNetFormer generator and
spectral normalization in the discriminator are added to a pix2pix GAN framework to
predict next-hour QPF for lake-effect events. A novel dataset is developed for the
model with High-Resolution Rapid Refresh (HRRR) and Multi-Radar/Multi-Sensor System
(MRMS) fields for input and MRMS precipitation estimates for the target. Five input
variable groupings are tested to identify the optimal predictors for each of the four
lakes, and saliency analysis is applied to identify the most important input variables.
Two models are developed for each lake: one with a weighted loss function (LESNetA), and
one without (LESNet-B). The developed models outperform the HRRR's predictions across all
five metrics, with gains of over 100 percent over the HRRR in Pearson correlation coefficient
and fractions skill score indicating superior forecasts in all precipitation intensities.
LESNet-A performs better in heavier events, while LESNetB performs better in lighter events.
Both are comparable in light events. Their outstanding performance notably displays the
significant potential of modernized GANs to advance lake-effect precipitation prediction.


Figure descriptions:

metrics.pdf: Percent improvement of the models over the HRRR in various metrics.
In each rectangle, the left side with the bolded number represents LESNet-B, and
the right side with the italicized number represents LESNet-A.

fss.pdf: Percent improvement of the models over the HRRR in Fractions Skill Score
for various thresholds. Each rectangle is split into four quadrants, one for each lake.
The neighborhood used is 5 pixels (0.05º).

superior.pdf: The HRRR, LESNet-A, LESNet-B, and the target compared for 3 distinct
events over Lake Superior. Each column corresponds to a specific event from the
test split. The number in the top-right corner of each prediction is the FSS for
the threshold corresponding to the intensity of the event. "Light" is defined as
0.25 mm, "moderate" is defined as 1 mm, and "heavy" is defined as 2 mm.

michigan.pdf: The same as superior.pdf, but over Lake Michigan, and each row
corresponds to a specific event from the test split.

erie.pdf: The same as superior.pdf, but over Lake Erie.

ontario.pdf: The same as superior.pdf, but over Lake Ontario.
